When reading Nietzsche’s texts, one is sometimes startled by the unqualified statements he makes. One can find him arguing that “God is dead” (GS 125) or that slavery might be a necessary institution (BGE 257). Buddhist texts have a similar effect, attacking our fundamental pre-suppositions and intuitions about reality. “The deed is, yet no doer can be found,” (Rahula 26) the Buddha said. Not surprisingly, when juxtaposing and directly comparing paragraphs from Nietzsche’s texts and Buddhist Sutras (sacred scriptures) about the “Self,” the ideas expressed often seem exactly opposed to each other. Buddhism is known to deny the self and condemn strong desires; Nietzsche would never say there is no self – he is concerned with developing an autonomous self that asserts its will to power. Superficial readings of these approaches are often preoccupied with the opposing conclusions they assert. If we start at the beginning, however, and compare closely the most fundamental assumptions both philosophies make about the Self and distinguish clearly between the different aspects of Self which are denied and affirmed, we find that they are very much alike. Considering this common ground, then, we can analyze more clearly which assumptions lead Nietzsche to draw different conclusions from Buddhism – and how substantial these differences are.

“Buddhism” is too wide a term to elicit a fruitful discussion with Nietzsche’s philosophy. While many scholars, such as Freny Mistry (1981) and Robert Morrison (1997), have focused on comparing early Buddhism to Nietzsche’s thought, my discussion will focus on Zen Buddhism. Some more recent research, notably by Bret Davis (2004) and Andre Van der Braak (2013), has shifted the focus of study toward Zen. Zen is a form of Buddhism that was established in 11th century, while the earliest Buddhist teachings date back to the 5th century BCE. Zen has absorbed historical influences that have greatly shaped its doctrines. The following is a brief, reductive, yet I believe helpful account of what separates Zen from earlier forms of Buddhism. Zen is part of the umbrella school of Mahayana Buddhism, which evolved out of Indian Buddhism in the 1st century AD. Mahayana Buddhism especially stresses non-duality: instead of claiming, for instance, that there is no self, it is stressed that both propositions – that there is a separate self and that there is no self at all – are untenable. The truth of the matter must ultimately be found outside of language, beyond the distinction altogether. In its geographical movement toward Japan, Buddhism was heavily influenced by Chinese thought, as well. The Chinese focus on present experience, on the human body and mind, and a general disinterest in “otherworldliness”, has contributed to the “pragmatic” inclination of Zen (cf. Strong 157, 292f.). Earlier Buddhist schools can be interpreted as denouncing the world as suffering and yearning for extinction and nothingness, and some include a belief in forms of the afterlife. The focus Zen places on finding enlightenment in this body, and seeing this world from a new perspective, makes Zen less susceptible than early Buddhism to accusations of being engaged in a “will to nothingness,” which Nietzsche often criticizes. Finally, influenced by the Japanese tradition of viewing body and mind as intimately connected and not different in substance, Zen has shifted the focus of its practice from mental cultivation to cultivation of the body (Van der Braak 73). These nuances in doctrine make Zen uniquely suited for a dialogue with Nietzsche’s perspectivism, his focus on the body, and his stress on “incorporating knowledge” (GS 11).

In the first two sections of this paper, I will investigate the views Nietzsche and Zen hold about the ontological self: what kind of self is there? Are our intuitions about being a separate “I” tenable? It turns out that both approaches deny many common-sense hypotheses about the self. In the final section I will investigate how they address the normative question: if many of our ordinary intuitions about the self are false, how can we grasp this reality and behave accordingly? Rather than being content with skeptical inquiry and abstract discussions, both approaches have at their hearts, in their own ways, the intent to use their philosophies to deeply change the lives of their audiences.

Nietzsche’s Conception of the Self

In his various writings, Nietzsche expresses very strong and often skeptical views about such concepts as the soul, subjects of experience, doers and deeds, and the word “I”. At the same time, he has an intricate philosophy of “becoming what one is,” of uniting the drives and becoming an autonomous individual. Much of the scholarly work on this topic has focused on ascribing a coherent view to Nietzsche, reconciling the denial of many of our common-sense intuitions about the self with Nietzsche’s unique view on how to reestablish a form of self. In this first section, I will focus on examining the intuitions Nietzsche denies when denying the ordinary conception of self.

One common and intuitive sense of self – perhaps the most fundamental in everyday experience – is our sense that we ourselves are the ultimate controllers of our actions. When somebody tells me to raise one of my arms, then I decided to raise either my left arm or my right arm – or be rebellious and refuse to listen to the command. That controller, that agent, we often unquestioningly assume, must be who I am. In a different way of getting at this intuition, we think of this entity as the manager of our lives. If the manager was absent, our lives would fall apart. There is a perceived hierarchy of drives and will in ourselves. Sometimes, when I am on a diet, I have a strong desire to abstain from eating the cake, but I sometimes lose out to my intense craving of the cake. The language we often use here shows that we usually identify with this highest level of drives, the thoughts that comment on and attempt to regulate the other drives. It seems that Plato’s famous charioteer analogy captures the common intuition about steering the drives: the human soul, or psyche, is a chariot pulled by two winged horses, one representing our “spirited” impulses, related to honor, glory, and shame, the other our “lower” passions, akin to

3

instinctive drives. This chariot is pulled by the charioteer, namely the intellect, who controls the entire chariot. He must be careful, because the horses of course have a will of their own; but in the end, steering the chariot well is his responsibility and privilege (Phaedrus 246A-247C). While we accept that the horses, too, are part of ourselves, this charioteer is what we most identify with. It is that highest level of me, which acts and reacts to the environment and my own thoughts and emotions. It is the “I” that committed the action, the doer that committed the deed.

This phrasing is certainly one that Nietzsche denies. In a well-known passage of the first book of On the Genealogy of Morals, he claims that there is no doer behind the deed: “The doer is merely fictitiously added to the deed – the deed is all there is.”1 (GM I:13) This view is not to be misunderstood as claiming that there is no consciousness, no psychological reality present when a person commits an action. Robert Pippin clarifies that it doesn’t make sense to attribute a reductive naturalist view to Nietzsche, in which there are only “matter-events”, without meaningfully distinguishable people and psyches. Such a dismissal of psychological realities would run counter to Nietzsche’s line of argument in the rest of GM, which is in large part a study of hidden motives and self-deception of the slave morality – not exactly a physicalist reduction of human experience. As Pippin argues, if we attribute a completely eliminativist view to Nietzsche, “it is hard to see how we might individuate ... expressions of force, and even if we could, how we might distinguish a universe of episodic, atomistic force-events from the world that Nietzsche himself refers to, a world with some clear substantial continuities: slaves, masters, institutions, preists, and so on” (146).

Rather, in interpreting GM I:13, we should focus on the very sense of a causally autonomous self that I described above. Nietzsche traces our conviction that every act must be

1 Most of the Nietzsche translations are my own from the original German, occasionally with reference to Walter Kaufmann’s. (While Kaufmann’s translation captures Nietzsche’s style very well, I am here concerned with reproducing the language as literally as possible).

4

attributed to an extra entity back to the way most grammar, including that of English and German, works. In reality, there is only “effecting,” no separate subject that causes the effect:

only through the seduction of language (and the fundamental errors of reason petrified in it), which understands and misunderstands all effecting as conditioned by an effector, can it appear differently. Just as the popular mind separates the lightning from its flash, and takes the latter as the deed, the effect of a subject, which is called lightning, so popular morality separates expressions of strength, as if behind the strong one there was an indifferent substratum, which was at liberty to either express strength or not. But there is no such substratum; there is no “being” behind the doing, effecting, becoming. (GM I:13)

Other interpretations of this passage, including Pippin’s, have focused on the substratum of strength and weakness, claiming that while Nietzsche rejects the idea of a self behind the act, he allows that a self is being expressed in it. We will return to the positive claim in this passage later, but at this point it is important to become clear on what exactly Nietzsche is denying.

Nietzsche’s claim that language adds a fictitious subject is quite obvious in the case of lightning and flash. When there is a flash, we might colloquially say that there was “lightning” which “flashed” – but on reflection, it is clear that the lightning was not a separate entity (or essence) that either could or could not have expressed the flash. The lightning, clearly, is nothing over and above the flash – nothing over and above the expression that actually took place. Thus, there is clearly no “indifferent substratum,” as Nietzsche says, in the case of the flash. When it comes to human action, however, this analogy loses its intuitive appeal and seems like a more radical claim. Here, there is the pernicious intuition that our language points to something real: that behind every human action, there is an indifferent substratum, an agent, who would have been the same, no matter which action he chose. Further, our intuition might suggest that this subject is the “experiencer,” the separate “me” who experiences my “doing” and “becoming.” In the view which Nietzsche is denying here, whichever action an agent chooses, that action does not describe the whole event – there is a persistent, separate subject beyond it, which either causes it or experiences it. Note that on Nietzsche’s view, “action” can be defined very broadly here: it can include all the thoughts, psychological states, brain states, physical movement etc., that occur as part of the action. As I have argued earlier along with Pippin, Nietzsche does not deny the existence of all these factors. Nietzsche’s argument here is that this complex reality of action is all there is, and that the unchanging subject behind the action – “the decider” of decisions and the “experiencer” of experience – is in reality just as “extra” as the lightning is to the flash.

This point is made even more explicit in Beyond Good and Evil. Nietzsche heavily condemns the view that assumes, based on the experience of thought, that there is a subject of thought:

If I analyze the process expressed by the sentence “I think,” I get a series of reckless assumptions, whose justification is hard, potentially impossible, – for example that it is I, who thinks, that there has to a Something at all, which thinks, that thinking is a doing and effecting by a being, which is thought to be the cause, that there is an “I,” finally, that it is already certain what is to be identified with the word Thinking, – that I know what thinking is. (BGE 16)

Nietzsche is challenging us to closely investigate our most fundamental thought processes. In this actual experience, we cannot find an “I.” All we find is that a certain thought is occurring – all the other assumptions he lists might be impossible to even justify. Shortly after, Nietzsche asserts: “I will not become tired of underlining a small short fact, ... namely that a thought comes when ‘it’ wants, and not when ‘I’ want it to, so that it is a falsification of factual reality to say: the subject ‘I’ is the condition of the predicate ‘think.’” (BGE 17) In a sense, the most fundamental assumptions for the existence of a causally autonomous soul and a separate experiencing subject are that “I” can make my thought come when “I” want it to, and that there is an extra “I” over and above the thought. Nietzsche argues that on close inspection, both of these are things which we simply have no good reason to believe.

Nietzsche posits further that “the popular mind essentially redoubles doing when it makes the lightning flash, it is a doing-doing: it posits the same event once as cause and then once again as its effect” (GM I:13). His argument is best understood on the premise that, as I have argued earlier, Nietzsche denies an autonomous, transcendent ego. In the absence of such an entity, it becomes clear that there are two ways in which we could interpret any decision to act. Either, one concedes that the decision happened, in a sense, spontaneously or automatically, and gives up on the particular variety of autonomy in question. Or, to save this picture of autonomy where “I myself am the willer”, one has again two options: on the one hand, one could argue that the decision caused itself. This is precisely the “causa sui” (cause of itself) that Nietzsche denies in the above quote and calls the best self-contradiction conceived of so far (BGE 21). On the other hand, there is one (similarly absurd) option that Nietzsche does not address here: something else that “I” can identify with could have caused the decision. Without a transcendent ego, the only viable candidate to identify with, however, is another decision. This would mean de facto that to be autonomous, every decision would have to be preceded by another decision to decide that. This view, however, is untenable, too; for we can now ask: what caused the decision to decide that? If it was another decision, we are running into an infinite regress: decision, on this view, is not only redoubled, it is made infinite. Each decision would need another causing-decision, and either this chain of decisions is infinite – which is implausible and still does not save our picture of autonomy – or the chain ends and at the end of that chain, there is yet again the uncaused, spontaneous decision this view aims at denying.  

It becomes even clearer that Nietzsche holds such a view in BGE 19, where he explicitly
analyzes what he takes to be the process of willing. Rather than being an obvious and familiar process, Nietzsche thinks willing is complex, something “which is only a unity in language.” He roughly identifies three different aspects that take part in willing. First, there is a multiplicity of feeling, which we experience as the drive from the current state to another. Second, each act of willing is accompanied by a “command-thought.” Rather than just accompanying the will, however, this commanding thought is an integral part of the will: “we shall not make the mistake to think that we could separate this thought from the ‘willing’, as though any will would still remain then!” Besides the first two, there is also an affect of commanding that accompanies the will, namely the subjective feeling of superiority of the “commanding thought” over that part which obeys. This perception, Nietzsche says, is chiefly the illusion of free will. “‘I am free, ‘it’ must obey’ – this awareness is in every act of willing...” Nietzsche goes on to deny both the “I” and the freedom in this statement.

The error in this is that insofar as we identify the thought as a constant entity, we are wrong. The will is an interaction between a commanding and an executing part, not a unitary thing. “We are in the habit of defying and deceiving ourselves about this duality by way of the synthetic concept of ‘I.’” The second error, the freedom we presume, stems from this assumption of this synthetic I. By presuming the commanding one and the obeying one to be the same, we assume that willing alone is enough for action. We derive this erroneous conclusion by exclusively focusing on the instances in which willing led to successful completion of the willed action. We are in a sense engaged in the fallacy of post hoc, ergo propter hoc: the action came after the will, therefore the will must have necessitated it. According to Nietzsche, when we think that the “commanding” function and the “obeying” function are on the same team, so to speak, we are grossly mistaken about the way human psychology works. “Our body is, after all, only a societal structure of many souls.” (BGE 19) The mistake is that in the case of successful willing (which occurs all the time – but we do not count all the instances of unsuccessful willing) the commanding part of willing appropriates the “lust feeling” of the “successful instruments, the subservient sub-wills or sub-souls.”

This view leaves very little room for a substantive Self in the sense of an autonomous or commanding entity. Nietzsche’s positive claim about where our sense of self stems from, on the other hand, has already emerged in some passages. One of Nietzsche’s striking passages illustrates his conception of how the organism creates a sense of unity:

The belief that regards the soul as something indestructible, eternal, indivisible, as a monad, as an atomon: this belief ought to be expelled from science! Between ourselves, it is not at all necessary to get rid of “the soul” at the same time... But the way is open for new versions and refinements of the soul-hypothesis; and such conceptions as “mortal soul,” and “soul as subjective multiplicity,” and “soul as social structure of the drives and affects” want henceforth to have citizens’ right in science. (BGE 12)

Further, in the Will to Power, he writes:  
"The assumption of one single subject is perhaps unnecessary; perhaps it is just as permissible to assume a multiplicity of subjects, whose interaction and struggle is the basis of our thought and our consciousness in general? A kind of aristocracy of ‘cells’ in which dominion resides? To be sure, an aristocracy of equals, used to ruling jointly and understanding how to command?” (WP 490)

These passages suggest that Nietzsche is not merely skeptical of the self, as BGE 17 suggested,
but that he explicitly denies a single subject of experience. The micro-processes that condition the “thought and consciousness” we tend to experience as one, the interaction of neurons and electrons as we might say today, is ever out of our reach.

Taking Nietzsche’s aristocracy analogy to illustrate this point, it is obvious that a nation or government could never have one real will, except in a highly metaphorical sense. It is true that an aristocracy could, in theory, work in a very efficient and frictionless manner; in such a system where each member knows exactly what the other will do and how his own part fits in. In this sense we might be extremely tempted to speak of one well-functioning system with a single will. Furthermore, one aristocracy could perhaps express the “will of the people” (though Nietzsche might take issue with this specific metaphor) better than another; it could, for example, have an excellent formula for ascertaining and executing what “the people” want. However, in each of these cases we must remind ourselves that we are speaking merely of a concept, not the actual will of a singular subject. Insofar as an aristocracy is analogous to the self, the same applies for the different cells, drives, and affects. No matter in what way this system functions, the “unity of will” can only ever be metaphorical.

That Nietzsche holds such a view of free will and plurality of subjectivity is quite striking. It goes beyond the denial of a Christian or even Platonic idea of a soul, as he does not merely deny ideologies that make bold explanatory claims. It is rather a rigorous philosophical attack on some of the most fundamental assumptions with which ordinary people live their lives. Furthermore, he derives most of his conclusions from the basic facts of his own experience while discounting the allure of language (BGE 12,16,17). As I will argue, he is quite akin to Buddhism in both of these respects.

To some readers, however, the obvious sense in which there is a self might not be tied to causal autonomy or free will in the first place. It is simply consciousness. Consciousness is the
locus of experience. No matter how many different drives affect the formation of a will, or how diverse an “aristocracy of cells” controls the organism, there seems to be only a single conscious experience for each person. No matter the specific content of our consciousness, it always seems to be our consciousness – an unchanging entity in this sense. As an unchanging entity that is unique to ourselves, it seems like the obvious candidate for what we might call a “Self.”

Such a view, according to Nietzsche, is a “ridiculous overestimation and misunderstanding of consciousness” (GS 11). In much of the Gay Science, he takes a historical and evolutionary perspective in evaluating the role of consciousness. From this vantage point, consciousness is a new feature of the human organism, and as such not fully developed. For Nietzsche, even highly intelligent action is absolutely conceivable without consciousness, as most of our body’s complex processes do not enter consciousness anyway (GS 354). Consciousness, on the face of it, is only a “mirror” in which the physiological and neural processes that go on in the organism anyway are reflected, or “simulated” as we might say today: “all of life would be possible without simultaneously seeing itself in the mirror: as indeed even now for us the vastly predominant part of this life occurs without this mirroring – namely even our thinking, feeling, willing life.” (GS 354) This is a striking claim: not only does Nietzsche think that highly developed unconscious life is possible, but that there is even a sense of unconscious thinking and feeling. This view is in direct conflict with the intuition proposed above: the common sense is that there might be many unconscious, physical processes that condition and influence what finally enter consciousness; but that eventually, only consciousness counts as experience, as mental life. Nietzsche is redirecting the emphasis here: the mere fact that something is mirrored in consciousness simply does not elevate it above the unconscious instances of thinking and feeling. If Nietzsche had thought otherwise, he would perhaps have called these unconscious mechanisms “processing”; but my sense is that he chose words that usually denote conscious,
mental life, to describe these bodily functions precisely to point out that their importance to the person as a whole is essentially on par with conscious experience.

Nietzsche further strongly denies that consciousness constitutes the unchanging unity of the organism. “One thinks the kernel of man is here; his lasting, eternal, final, most original part! One takes consciousness to be a constant determinate magnitude! Denies (leugnet) its growth, its intermittences! Takes it to be the ‘unity of the organism’!” (GS11) To illustrate how Nietzsche’s claim might be interpreted, it is helpful to consider John Locke’s view on consciousness and personal identity. Locke held the view that unity or identity of a person over time is established by the consciousness: “it being the same consciousness that makes a man be himself to himself, personal identity depends on that only.” (Section 10) It is an open question, however, what Locke meant by “same consciousness”. One interpretation is that Locke identified “same consciousness” with continuous conscious mental life, specifically memory. If the memory of a person is coherent with the past, the person is thereby consciously connected to her past. In other words, the content of consciousness is what allows us to extrapolate that it is the “same consciousness.” This view, as many subsequent philosophers have pointed out, is highly problematic. There is, for example, the case of severe anterograde amnesia. In this condition, people cannot remember anything that happened after a certain time and have a short-term memory of less than five seconds. Such people often continue to exhibit a personality hardly distinguishable from before the amnesia occurred; they recognize their spouses and habitually carry out old rituals (cf. Markowitsch). Memory is clearly not a connecting factor, but it would be hard to argue that every few seconds, a different person comes into being. Similarly, it is absurd that the amnesiac should be identical with the person before the amnesia occurred – the one she remembers – but not identical with the human she was thirty seconds ago – whom she has
forgotten.3 We could then take Nietzsche’s reference to intermittences of consciousness as intermittences of our unreliable conscious memory and other psychological factors: consciousness, in this conception, is clearly not a determinate magnitude.

The alternative interpretation of the Lockean view is that he thought it was literally the “same consciousness” – the same field of awareness – that established the unity of a person over time. Locke even claims that “in the identity of consciousness, wherein if Socrates and the present mayor of Queensborough agree, they are the same person.” (Section 19) But what could possibly lead us to believe that Socrates and the mayor of Queensborough have the same consciousness, given that the content of their mental lives is completely different? This view, then, is at best hard to defend and at worst unintelligible. Without referring to the content of consciousness, it is unclear what could possibly be the same or different. As Mark Johnston has argued, consciousness can only be understood as “an arena within which things appear.” (241) When one goes to bed or becomes temporarily comatose, consciousness disappears. When one wakes up, the only reason one has to believe that one is the same person as before this lapse in consciousness is the content of consciousness. In short, both of these views now seem untenable: neither the content of consciousness – primarily memory – can establish the “unity of the organism,” for even extreme lapses don’t seem to seriously compromise the perceived identity of a person. Consciousness per se, on the other hand, also could not be a candidate for this unity, since without content, it is meaningless or unintelligible what this consciousness would be.